"Now that you are familiar with
the basics of storage in Linux,
I feel it's a good time
to give a quick overview
of commonly used external storage,"
says Mohan.
"Why do we use external storage?"
Asks Bob.
Mohan replies, "For a desktop
environment, such as your laptop,
we can get away with using
the onboard storage
or attaching an external drive
for our data needs."
He explains that this is not feasible
for an enterprise-grade
server environment
such as a production database
or a web server
storing a lot of data.
As a result, they make use
of enterprise-grade high capacity
external storage
with high availability.
We're going to see three
different types of storage here.
The DAS,
which is the Direct Attached Storage.
The NAS,
which is Network Attached Storage
and quite similar
to the NFS server we saw earlier.
Finally, the SAN,
which is the Storage Area Network.
This technology uses a fiber channel
for providing high-speed storage.
With DAS,
external storage is attached directly
to the host system
that requires the space.
The host operating system
sees a connected desk device
as a blocked device.
There is no network or firewall
between the storage and the host,
which means this provides excellent
performance at a very affordable cost.
DAS generally has a faster response
than a NAS device
where the data traffic
goes over the network.
The downside is that
since the DAS is directly attached,
it is dedicated to a single server.
As a result, this is not ideal
for enterprise environments
where multiple servers
need storage
and is more suitable
for small businesses.
NAS, on the other hand, is suitable
for mid to large businesses.
NAS stands for
Network Attached Storage,
which means that the NAS
storage device is generally located
apart from the hosts
that will consume space from it.
The data traffic between the storage
and the host is through the network.
The physical distance between the two
may not be significant.
They may be located in the same rack
in a data center, for example.
Yet, the data would have to traverse
through the network.
If you notice this simple
architecture diagram of a NAS system,
you will notice that this
is quite similar to the NFS server.
This is because
NAS is a file storage device,
unlike DAS and SAN both of which
are our block storage devices.
The storage is provided to the hosts
in the form of a directory
or a share that is physically present
in the NAS device
but exported via NFS to the hosts.
As a result,
this type of storage
is ideal for centralized
shared storage that
needs to be accessed simultaneously
by several different hosts.
The performance of the NAS
and high-speed ethernet connectivity
between the two,
it can provide good performance
and highly available
storage solution.
This type of storage
can be used as the back-end storage
for web servers
or application servers
and can even run databases,
although not recommended
for production workloads.
NAS is not a recommended storage
to install operating systems.
The last type of external storage
we will see is the SAN,
which is the Storage Area Network.
SAN provides block storage
used by enterprises
for business-critical applications
that need to deliver
high throughput and low latency.
Storage is allocated to hosts
in the form of a LUN,
which stands for Logical Unit Number.
A LUN is a range of blocks
provisioned from
a pool of shared storage
and presented to the server
as a logical disk.
The host system will detect
this storage as a raw disk.
We can then create partitions
and file systems on top of it
as we would
with any other block device
and then mount it on the system
to store data.
While SAN can also be ethernet-based,
it mainly makes use of the FCP,
which stands for
Fiber Channel Protocol.
This is a high-speed data transfer
protocol that
makes use of a fiber channel switch
to establish communication
with the host.
The host servers make use of HBA,
or a Host Bus Adaptor,
which is connected to the PCI slot
to interface with
the fiber channel switch.
The major advantage of SAN over NAS
is that it can be used to host
mission-critical applications
and databases due to its vastly
superior performance and reliability.
These include installing
Oracle Databases or Microsoft SQL DB,
using it for
virtualization deployments
such as VMware, KVM,
or Microsoft Hyper –V.